i've met a lot of organizations that
think
most of their issues are in the training
of their people
and 99 of the time i see that it's
actually
in the way that they're setting their
goals and deploying their strategy
because once you train those people
they have no context on what to work
towards so it's such an a holistic
approach when you actually go through
these transformations or try to set up a
product organization so you either need
somebody in there to do it or you got to
really be ready to move when somebody
comes in to help you
through her speaking consulting interim
cpo roles and teaching at both harvard
business school and online melissa perry
has seen more product orgs up close than
possibly any human alive
in our chat we cover the most common
problems that product teams face and how
to overcome them
when to hire your first pm how to hone
your craft as a pm signs you're doing a
bad job as a pm
also how to structure your product teams
and product development process signs
your team doesn't have a strategy and
how to come up with one also how to come
up with a product vision and so much
more i love chatting with melissa and i
learned a ton and i can't wait for you
to hear this episode
if you're setting up your analytics
stack but you're not using amplitude
what are you doing
amplitude is the number one most popular
analytics solution in the world used by
both big companies like shopify
instacart and atlassian and also most
tech startups
amplitude has everything you need
including a powerful and fully
self-service analytics product an
experimentation platform and even an
integrated customer data platform to
help you understand your users like
never before give your teams
self-service product data to understand
your users drive conversions and
increase engagement growth and revenue
get your vanity metrics trust your data
work smarter and grow your business try
amplitude for free just visit
amplitude.com to get started
this episode is brought to you by
revenuecat revenuecad makes it easy to
build analyze and grow in-app
subscriptions on ios android and the web
their platform lets you focus on growth
rather than getting bogged down in
subscription infrastructure revenue cap
provides a back-end and a wrapper around
apple store kit and google play billing
to handle the implementation and upkeep
of in-app purchases
revenuecad is your source of truth for
customer status across platforms and
provides out-of-the-box analytics for
key subscription metrics like monthly
recurring revenue lifetime value
retention and more with revenue cap you
also get pre-built integrations with
best-in-class tools like amplitude apps
flyer and firebase that means reliable
consistent data sync to your entire
product and growth stack in minutes
see why companies like notion bisco and
life360 use revenue cap to power in-app
subscriptions learn more at
revenuecat.com
[Music]
melissa welcome thank you so much for
joining me thanks for having me
it's absolutely my pleasure i wanted to
set a little context for folks that may
not be familiar with you um
how many pms have you worked with and
helped would you say over the course of
your career
so between teaching consulting and all
of those different things
it's probably
north of 4000 at this point i think
we're approaching 5 000 now
oh my god okay and then how many
companies would you say you've worked
with
so
if we're talking like deep consulting
since i started products labs we've done
over 30 companies where we've been in
there
did something with them either
transformation wise or setting up their
pm work or setting their strategy
helping with road maps if we're talking
training we're into the multiple
hundreds
okay uh insane would you say that you're
maybe in the top three maybe top five
people in the world that have worked
with the most product managers or you've
even met the most product managers
i know a lot of people who do what i do
so um i think
probably among them probably among them
but
i haven't counted everybody else's
okay so
for all these reasons i'm really excited
to dig into a lot of the stuff that
you've learned along this journey and
things that people can take away from
your experience what do you spend your
time doing these days i know there's a
lot a lot in your portfolio well right
now i'll say my primary focus is on
training and education
in product management so i'm teaching at
harvard i teach the second year mbas and
their elective program product
management so they can choose whether or
not they want to take that but that's
been really great and then i have had an
online school since 2016 called product
institute so it's all a self-serve
online education place where we have
multiple courses in product management
we have trained almost all of the
fortune 100 companies at this point
through that with product management
which is great but a lot of different
growth stage companies coming in there
too and smaller companies as well
so been doing that for quite some time
and then i more recently started cpo
accelerator which is a program to help
vps and heads of product really make the
leap into the c-suite so that's been
really great because i i believe that
the more we train people to be better
product executives the better the
products they'll make and the better
product managers they'll make by
training them as well so that's been my
primary focus i am writing another book
called product operations after writing
escaping the bill trap
i thought i would never write again but
it's time you know you know that feeling
so i'm excited about that i'm running it
with my
former vp of product at productslabs
denise
and yeah before i was doing this
what i'm doing right now i was doing all
that plus i was also consulting pretty
deeply with companies through products
labs but at the end of 2020 i took a
step back from that to take a little
break from it
kind of focus more on the teaching
aspects of things and try to figure out
what else i'm gonna do from here
i love that you mentioned your book you
almost didn't and i was gonna make sure
to mention it and we're gonna talk about
it more in a little bit and i have it
right here and hopefully i can get it
signed someday in real life um before we
get into that so
you've worked with
dozens of companies directly
hundreds maybe indirectly through the
course and then like you said thousands
of pms
when you come into a company
they basically bring you in to help them
level up their product team their
product management function
what are like one or two of the most
common problems that you run into or
even unexpected problems you run into
especially at modern tech companies not
like you know ford and things like that
no offense um what do you what do you
run into usually in 2014 i started
consulting with companies through
products labs and
it's funny because some people will be
like oh well you've never worked with
i get i get two sides of it i'll get the
well you don't really work with the sas
companies but i had a whole partnership
with insight venture partners where we
go in and play the interim cpo role in
their high growth sas companies we'd
help them scale we'd set their strategy
and their road maps and all that stuff
so we did that for a long time
and then i have also come in and helped
organizations that aren't really sas
like banks and um
a lot of banks oh bob a lot of banks uh
but your pharmaceutical companies and
all these other ones to kind of set up
product management for the first time so
i've seen the whole gamut from like
super
you know software focused teams to
companies that are still just just
figuring out software and it's been
great because some of the the companies
i've worked with
now since 2014 i've been able to see you
know eight years of their progressions
and what they go through with that and
i'd say like it's very different if
you're sas versus non-sas but if we're
talking about like the sas companies
that get software like software is what
they sell software is a critical part of
the strategy they're bought in they know
that it's really important
one of the biggest issues i kind of see
with them and product management is
at this pivotal scale-up phase where
they go from hey i found product market
fit too i'm ready to scale
one it's hiring a great cheap product
officer that can help
them figure out what the next phase is
so it's basically there's this junction
point where they go from single product
to multi-product but then they have to
manage a complex portfolio and then they
have to scale rapidly
at that point they have to re rethink
their entire strategy right and then
they have to focus because they have all
of these choices to keep building for
their existing customers and you know
just take everything off
the you know the backlog because
everybody's requesting things they
really have to focus and prioritize and
that becomes
absolutely critical but it's usually the
first time that companies actually had
to form
a comprehensive strategy in a
prioritized strategy and deploy it to
hundreds of employees which will scale
to thousands of employees
and that
is hard like it's not easy to do and if
you've never done it before which a lot
of people haven't in that position
that becomes really complicated and then
there's some companies too that bypass
that initial growth phase because they
already could clearly see what their you
know second third product should be and
they were scaling really fast and that's
awesome and they're really really
successful but then they start to
plateau
and they have the same problem where
they have to rethink reprioritize and it
just always comes back to how do i set
strategy how do i deploy strategy and
how do i like make sure it's well
communicated and that everything that
we're doing on the tech teams on the
product teams is laddered up into a
company strategy that's well prioritized
but that has to be the biggest issue
that i see with
companies at all that are just like
they get the software piece they know
it's a critical part of their business
it's just like how do we prioritize it
and double down
and build the org and find the right
people to build it all out i'd love to
double click on that what is a sign that
it's time for a cpo and and then what do
you look for when you're hiring a cpu i
know these are big questions but i'd
love to hear your thoughts usually
whoever was a product leader whether it
was a founder or maybe somebody was a
little bit more junior
in those phases at the beginning finding
product market fit trying to get into
the growth stage early growth stage
it's really about execution at that
point it's like rapidly experimentation
trying to figure that out and all hands
on deck you're usually a little bit in
the weeds as well doing the work
yourself too and then when you get into
needing a cpo it's like hey we actually
have to pull together a product strategy
that's all-encompassing we have to have
great communication between product and
the executive team a big sign for me
when i've come in and worked with like
boards or executive teams as well
is they're telling me like i don't
really know what's going on in tech or
product
i have no idea if we're like achieving
our goals if your executives and your
board are telling you that the person
who's communicating those things to them
are usually not chief product officer
level right like if you are
if you your executives don't know what
you're doing
that's that's a big problem
so uh that's usually the sign to me that
we need that i go in when i was going in
and consulting like pretty deeply the
first thing i would do
is go to all the teams if there was like
5 000 teams of smattering of teams but
i'd always ask them like what are you
working on what's the most important
thing you could be doing and why and i
would try to ladder that up myself
into a strategy and see
if it was connected right and if it
wasn't connected that's telling me
somebody is not formulating the strategy
and deploying it down
and then that's telling me there's a
lack of strategy at the top and that
that would be like hey
is there a cpo here and if there is
maybe this person isn't right for the
job
or there's no cpo and we do need
somebody around this to actually
formulate that strategy
on an org design perspective with the
team i'd look at the product managers if
the product managers aren't
sometimes you have great product
managers and they're frustrated because
they're not getting the direction they
need and you tell their great product
managers like they know what they're
doing they're in there showing me
there's a lack of leadership there if
there's
trouble hiring product managers that's a
good sign that you need a cpo you need
somebody they can learn from and give
them those opportunities and if there's
a lot of junior product managers who've
never done it before
it's like
what's their training you know what's
their training path is there something
in there is there a process implemented
where everybody can follow it is there a
a way for them to learn if those things
are lacking it's telling me like there's
a gap in leadership on the product level
awesome that is really helpful
is there like a number of pms that it
usually ends up being of how many pms
you have when it's time to maybe hire a
cpo it really differs i'd say the
critical junction points i found deal
more with company strategy so like we
used to talk about this a lot at insight
but it's kind of like if you're going
above 10 million dollars in ar it's
usually when you hit around 20 to 30 you
start to bring on a cpo and a high
growth company what the product starts
to look like is you have multi products
you have more than two or more sometimes
you can have a vp of product over to you
that's totally fine but as soon as you
start to think about expanding into a
more complex portfolio after that i'd
look for
probably a cpo if you're expanding
geographically if you're going into new
markets like drastically new markets the
more complex your portfolio
the bigger the sign is that you need a
cpo if you're doing a major
transformation or pivot if you're doing
a huge merger of two companies you're
probably going to need a cpo of those
two things so those types of events
usually lay to
if you don't have a cpo it's it's time
to get one
the number of product managers i'd
probably say it starts to hit around
like maybe
eight seven to eight is usually what i'd
look for but it depends on what the rest
of the team looks like too so a lot of
times chief product officers especially
in a high growth company are not going
to be over just product right we'd have
product reporting into them design some
kind of product operations sometimes
analytics depending on what company it
is and then even in certain cases i put
engineering underneath a cpo when there
hasn't been really strong engineering
leadership and you need to have product
leading tech and maybe there's a
disconnect there and it's just like you
don't have time you need one liter you
need to simplify it and go
so depending on the scope that somebody
is covering as well if they're only
seeing product and there's no
opportunity for them to be over designed
or something else we'll probably stick
with the vp of product but if you need a
singular lead leader to bring all those
things together that's where i would
start looking for a chief product
officer too
what do you suggest companies do up
until that point i know titles are
not necessarily consistent i imagine
usually there's like a head of product
before that point is that what you'd
recommend what should you do up until
you get to a point where it's time for a
cpo head of product or vpa product i
think are very interchangeable in my
head what a bp a product or a head of
product is is a functional leader around
product management sometimes you have
design reporting into them sometimes not
but they're very good at implementing
processes so that product works smoothly
they can pull together the roadmap
across all of your product managers they
can usually train lower level people
where the gaps come between that and
becoming an executive is like
interfacing with the board understanding
the financials super deeply so that you
can
create revenue projections off of what
your roadmaps and your products strategy
is going to be so like chief product
officers have to deeply understand
how to get from you know roadmap to
revenue and how to analyze those things
and put it into perspective so they're
usually joined at the hip with the chief
revenue officer or the head of sales the
cfo they can confidently project to the
board they're a fantastic executive
navigator when it comes to dealing with
other executives and bringing those
things together
and they can oversee a lot more
functions than just product usually like
everything can kind of
you know they're they're a senior enough
person where you can have a couple
different functional lives report into
them with a head of design head of
product reporting up so
vps of product
are usually fantastic at growing like
one or two products but then when you
get
into multi-product strategies or very
complex platform strategies and the
scope starts to
to really creep that's where i would
start to bring into bringing a cpo
i was going to ask you about what to
look for in a cpu and you answered it so
amazing real quick before we move on to
kind of the skill of product management
and some thoughts there when would it
make sense for a company to consider
bringing in someone like you to do
either interim cpr role or just to help
out
yeah um so
i hope you never need me that's that's
my goal with everything i do i'm always
like i just wanted to be i would love to
put myself out of business one day
because i i just want this to work
really well but
where i
am needed
is usually when a ceo isn't sure
who is the right person to hire they're
usually on the fence i've come into
organizations to help ceos where they're
like do we need
a product person to oversee this like i
don't know what a product person does
and i usually talk them through like hey
what are the challenges you're having
and they tell me everything and i'm like
okay these ones are actually caused by
you not having that partner to work with
right like if you had that partner this
is what they could take off your plate
and free you up to focus on your vision
and you know fundraising and all the
other stuff that you have to do as a ceo
so
typically that's where i'd come into
advise and when i came in and consulting
in the past
my motto was always like
well first i i'll say like i
spent a long time doing transformational
work where i would deeply
embed and try to push
org design and you know deploying
strategy and really taking these
organizations
that didn't understand product
management helping them design how to do
it so i did that for quite a while and
then when i started working with gross
stage companies my
objective was like how do i get in
and get out as fast as possible and
bring them in the right leaders so what
i learned having been like deeply
embedded with these organizations doing
this transformation work was you know
somebody
needs to be at the helm of all of this
work consistently right and they also
have to be able to make the decisions as
well so
you can hire a consultant but if you
don't listen to the consultant nothing's
going to change and that does happen
more often than you think
where everybody just hires and they're
like no not that way and you're like
okay well you know it's up to you at the
end of the day i can't change it for you
i've also had people hire me as a
consultant and be like well no you you
change it and i'm like i can't like like
you can't just tell me to do your job
like you have to go out there and and do
it yourself but i will give you all the
important choices and try to decide it
to meet your needs and you know
sometimes it's not coming out super
ideal and perfect but it's all a
transition right like we make road maps
for transformations but being deeply
embedded like this i was starting to
think like
how do i make sure that this lasts and i
that's where i believe strong product
leadership comes in whether you train
somebody up in the organization to take
that role over and keep driving it
forward or you hire in somebody who
knows what they're doing so when i
started working with insight our premise
was like we will never touch a company
or be in a company hands-on for more
than three months right and the idea was
within that three months we hired a
chief product officer to take the helm
and we do just enough to keep it on
track playing an interim cpo role to
make sure that you know they can keep
delivering they could keep growing we'd
have just you know enough of a roadmap
to keep the teams moving we trained them
a little bit we helped implement some
processes we'd help set like we'd help
get all the information a cpo would need
so that when they walked into that
organization they could read the
background on their customers understand
what the strategy is so far look at the
current roadmap
watch some customer interviews
you know know who to talk to get the lay
of the land and have like some people
working on stuff and then they could
take the time they need to actually
build a strategy that's going to help
grow the company so really at the end of
the day when you need some help you
realize something is not working but
you're not sure how to make it right
and then you can either hire in a leader
sometimes the question is what kind of
leader that's when you try to hire a
consultant get some outside expertise on
that or if you want to hire an interim
cpo type person you have to understand
like that's very temporary unless you're
trying to convert that person into a
full time which is totally fine if you
want to do that and have those
expectations going in
but consultants can only help as well
when you're willing to take action so i
tell some companies as well at the
beginning like you're not ready for this
unless you are ready to take action and
sometimes that's drastic change
sometimes that's changing up people
sometimes you look at your organization
and say this isn't the organization
that's gonna get me to the next level so
we're gonna have to make some changes
we're gonna have to hire in some more
senior people as well who can help train
the masses of other people that need
training we're gonna have to make some
hard decisions and you have to
reevaluate your strategy a lot of times
and figure out how to set course with
that too i've met a lot of organizations
that
think
most of their issues are in the training
of their people
and 99 of the time i see that it's
actually
in the way that they're setting their
goals and deploying their strategy
because once you train those people
they have no context on what to work
towards so it's such an a holistic
approach when you actually go through
these transformations or try to set up a
product organization so you either need
somebody in there to do it or you gotta
really be ready to move when somebody
comes in to help you
i was gonna save these questions for
later but it's a good time as any to get
into them around strategy which your
book is about i would say is the fact
that people just build feature features
features and don't really have a
strategy or are using a strategy and so
just spending a little time there what
are signs that your team or your company
either doesn't have a strategy or
aren't using their strategy
yeah that's a great question signs that
there are no strategy
teams are all working
like dogs like they're they're working
80 hours a week i see this all the time
people are heads down crunch and crunch
and crunching releasing releasing
releasing or sometimes not releasing but
they're working like crazy and none of
the metrics are moving so the executive
team is going
what is happening
product is a black box tex tech is a
black box we've got all of these people
what do they do all day like great
example of when there is no strategy and
what usually is happening is there's
there's this missing middle it's like we
all know exactly what each team we don't
all know actually what each team is
working on the teams all know exactly
what they're working on which is usually
some kind of feature enhancement new
features whatever you got right
bug fixes all that wonderful stuff
very the people they report to usually
know what the teams are doing but the
executives are like cool how does that
matter
right to our business how does that
actually ladder up into our vision
where we want to go our objectives for
the year our goals
great sign that there is actually no
strategy deployed correctly now
when i say too like there's no strategy
there's usually some kind of strategy
but it lives in people's heads and
they're really bad at writing it down
and getting it out so
i always tell people too if you think
that there's no strategy like go just
like interrogate people for a while like
go talk to the leaders
is this good if we hit these numbers is
this bad why if i release this thing
what do you think will happen what
numbers will change right what what
behaviors will change how will this make
us better
it usually can pull out what people
believe the goals to be and sometimes
they're just not explicitly written down
so that's an exercise that i typically
do too when i don't see
strategy well manifested in these
organizations i just go in and i say
like okay let's like what does good look
like for you like where is the vision
where are we going and i ask
all of these questions too
to a lot of people and you find that
there's different answers across the
organization that shows a lack of
alignment on a complete strategy as well
i once asked all the executive team at a
healthcare company like what's the
vision for this company and they said to
be the backbone of healthcare i said
what does that mean and they couldn't
elaborate nobody could elaborate on that
and i said cool that's like a tagline
but it's not
a vision right what's what are we
manifesting into what are we doing what
are we not doing who do we want to be
when we grow up five to ten years from
now
how are we different than we are today
those things
more often than not are not written down
and they're not clearly communicated
so
one of the exercises we do is we write
if i see that there's no strategy i'm
like you need to write a two-pager um i
have ceos write two pagers on
where did the company come from how is
it different today what are external
threats to our market you know
what's what's our competition how do you
view our competition what should we what
should we care about what should we not
care about what are we going to do what
are we not going to do and then
prioritize their strategic intents or
what i call them which are like really
big business movers for the next you
know
two to three years so it's like are we
going to go up market are we going to go
down market are we going to expand
geographically are we going to
um innovate into a completely new market
or a new opportunity those types of
things need to be clearly prioritized at
the top and then you can start to make
the product portfolio at the bottom
and when there's a missing strategy
piece this i call it the missing middle
is usually gone which connects those
strategic intents and those business
outcomes back into what the teams are
actually doing so it's like great that
team is you know building a widget for
sales people to do cold emails
why
right like how is that going to move us
into what we want to do for our vision
is it retaining people because we have a
problem with their current market is it
allowing us to enter a new market if we
put it together but
if we think about all the things that
teams do in isolation
it's not enough usually to move those
business metrics so what people do in
lack of strategy is they spread the team
too thin across tons of initiatives
like one team usually isn't enough to
get some really hard hitting metrics out
there
and then you don't see the progress that
you're actually looking to see as an
executive
if a feature ships but no one knows
about it did it really ship
keeping customers and internal teams
like sales support and marketing in the
loop on what's changing across your
product is surprisingly hard first you
have to dig through tickets and pull
requests just to see what's been done
then you have to figure out what's
relevant to each person craft updates
and then share them across all of your
channels
multiply this by the number of things
that ship every week and that's
basically a full-time job just to keep
everyone updated on what's changing
that's why high velocity product teams
like monte carlo armory and popsicle use
make log make log makes it easy to see
what's happening across tools like jira
linear asana and github and then to
write bite-sized updates which you can
immediately share with your audience
wherever they are including within your
app on slack over email and even on
twitter no more long boring blog style
change log posts that slow you down just
quick and easy updates that keep your
users informed and happy
try make log for free today just visit
make log dot com slash lenny to get
started so you're like a pm on a team
or even just a leader of a company and
you're like
i think we might have a strategy
maybe we don't i'm hearing like things
that are true at our company and i'm
kind of worried what does it look like
for me to like have a strategy you you
named a few things that you should
probably have
vision intents and actions and things
like that what it's like kind of like
the checklist of well if i have this
this this that we have a we probably
have a strategy in place at least a good
test is you go to all of your teams
and you ask them what they're doing and
why exactly what i was talking about
before
and they all tell a similar story we're
working on x y and z because it will it
goes into this initiative right and it
causes this type of value for these
customers which in return is going to
get us this business value and help us
enter these new markets right they can
connect everything they're doing from
the tactical stuff on the team all the
way back up to the business metrics and
if you deploy your strategy well
your product teams will deeply
understand
how their stuff actually impacts the
business and if you don't deploy it well
they're gonna be like i don't know why
i'm building this stuff so if you have a
bunch of people asking you like why are
we building this then you didn't do a
good job as a leader
explaining what what it is that you're
after right so
everybody should be telling the same
story another amazing sign when this is
all done really well too that i love is
there's hugely
way less infighting across stakeholders
and executives one of the biggest issues
i see
in organizations is when executives all
have different goals
and they're not aligned on the same
goals for the company so it's kind of
like sales teams over here like
no like our goal is you know net new
logos and you're like
cool but like in what markets and how is
that prioritized against what we're
building from our product roadmap and
why is this not in sync
and
i've seen really bad ceos like hit their
executives against each other with
different goals so they don't see each
other as one team and the executive team
should be one team and the best teams
i've ever seen the most successful
companies i've ever seen everybody works
together and they're like these are our
goals and these are our business goals
so
when strategy is deployed correctly and
you have that type of culture too with
your executives
they're all on the same page so you can
have very calm trade-offs talks about
are we gonna do
you know strategic intent one or two if
we do this then we don't get that are we
okay with that and it's it's not
emotional right it's more objective
because we're all there together to
further the business
and
a lot of times like
people you know we complain as product
managers about stakeholders all asking
for different things and that's always
going to be the case there's always
going to be a little bit of that but
you typically will get less of that on
the team too
because the priorities within each part
of the business should be aligned to the
overall priorities and it will be easier
to manage and it's easier to push back
on why we're not doing one thing over
the other thing because we all know what
our goals are we all know what the
company priorities are and we can see
why one thing versus the other won't
work
so you have these conversations which
makes so much sense just talk it out see
if everyone's on the same page about
your goals
how you think you're going to get to
that goal what do you do with that
usually recommend people throw it into
like a google doc that everybody sits
there and just confirms is happy and is
there kind of like a template that you
share with people well here's what we're
going to fill out by the end of this say
three month process
yeah i think it varies from company to
company some companies already have
their own template and i'll just use
that i don't try to reinvent the wheel
when it doesn't need to be reinvented
but i'll say like the memos that
we would write are probably
they're very easy to explain right two
pages for me on what's the vision where
are we going after
how are we positioned in the market and
against competition to reach that vision
where are we today like what's the
currency of our product what does it
actually look like
what are we going to do to get there
right like what's our priorities and
then i make people prioritize them so
i'm like
for if we're going this way are we
solving this problem what does that mean
context-wise and then what are the
outcomes that we're actually trying to
achieve when we get there and i do that
at different levels so we typically have
executive teams writing the strategic
intents for the business level we've got
product management leadership directors
vp cpos writing the product initiatives
usually cpos aren't writing them it's
more like director level vp for their
scope
product initiatives are usually very
problem oriented around
um
like big problems we can solve for our
customers like they're meaty they're
usually made up of multiple epics and
then you've got your product teams on
the ground floor working with the
developers
i use
epixer such a nobody everybody doesn't
agree on what they are i call them
options sometimes too but it's the
solutions it's like what are you gonna
what's the solutions you're gonna build
to actually
get into those product initiatives solve
those problems for the users and then
hit those strategic intents so you could
pretty much write
a one page or two pager like that for
every one of those levels and i think
that's great i think the more we write
about these things the more we talk
about it the more we put it into prose
the better and it's not like a product
requirements document that's 20 pages
it's like a two-pager just explaining
what we're doing and why and that
context we usually throw into google
docs or a wiki or something like that
link them all together so that you can
go from one to the next and then read
all the way up the strategy tree
i love that so simple and
like
not so
formulaic that feels like anybody the
company can do it and it's not like
there's a rigid one way to do a process
yeah and i i don't think there should be
for certain things you know
i think every company with a lot of
these processes and tools and frameworks
that we get into
you gotta massage it all and make it
your own and you're gonna find things
certain things are gonna work for one
company that don't work for the other
company based on their culture and what
they do
but i think the more that we can just
write and talk about things the easier
it is for all these different companies
to find their way of working and then
you codify that and you deploy that
throughout your organization
on the vision piece specifically it
reminds me when i was managing pms one
of the most common
areas of development for them was get
better at vision there's always this
like here's an opportunity to get better
vision
and it's always hard to explain exactly
what that means and how it looks when
they're doing better vision other than
just coming up with the incredible idea
that we execute on so maybe very
tactically what's like a form factor you
suggest for folks to even lay out a
vision it sounds like you really
encourage writing is that how you like
to think about it or do you find story
boards are often greater sketches or
anything else
yeah like when i write out visions i
like writing i think that to me is
probably the easiest way i've seen
people lay it out i've also seen people
put together like a great athena health
when i was in their consulting we had
one team
with a fantastic like head of ux and a
vp of product who would sit there
together and they made a great like
presentation of the vision but they they
mocked up prototypes and what it could
be and it wasn't like it wasn't tested
or set but the visual pieces of that got
people really aligned over like oh okay
and the diagrams i find when you can
show like how certain things relate to
each other sometimes it does come off in
words so i like a combination i like a
combination of some kind of presentation
plus writing and i think if you do those
two things together it becomes really
powerful but for me and for a lot of
people especially executives i've seen
too
sometimes they're more visually oriented
so if you can you know grab your ux
designer and sit there and sketch out
ideas and it doesn't even have to be
like it doesn't even have to be
wireframes right it doesn't have to be
the the end state of the product it
could just be like
how customers interact with things or
diagrams about the ecosystem and stuff
like that that just helps to draw a
little bit more color on it but i think
those two things kind of go hand in hand
i love that i find that anytime i have a
designer helping me with anything like
that i always
look so much smarter because they made
it look so much better know exactly oh
it's just a superpower
it is and it's just like it's amazing um
but i've seen that in in like every type
of presentation like you bring in a
designer to help you with like board
slides
and you're like oh my god it all makes
sense now right like i could talk over
here you look like a genius yeah you
look like a genius you're like damn
these look real good and
so i think there's just such a joint
relationship with any type of
presentation or trying to explain like
where you're going or what you want to
do if you can explain it through visuals
and with design ugh it's just gonna be
so much better for everybody
yeah
on the vision piece do you have any just
general advice for getting better at
vision
i try to think about a lot of
well there's there's a couple couple
tips here one
a vision should be concrete enough where
people can picture what it will be in
their head
it can't be a fluffy
like be the backbone of healthcare right
like what does that mean i don't get it
so people need to be able to look at a
vision
and say i can see how we're gonna like i
can understand that we're gonna get
there one day i don't know how we're
gonna get there today but we will find
out along the way right that's that's a
good vision it's lofty
far enough away where you can't just be
like oh we build that one thing and we
hit it it's not lofty enough vision
right it should be something that you
really want to iterate through and test
and try to figure out how to get there
uh
it should not be what you are at today
that's
that's a sign of like you hit the vision
already and maybe you're just tweaking
and exploiting it which is totally fine
but that's not really a good vision for
the future
i'd say two the way that i think through
it is like
how are we different and it's crazy how
much
how many visions i've read where nobody
actually talks about how they're
different
it's like we're going to be the best
be the best all right
how are you gonna do that right and i
think it's it's fine while you're
formulating a vision and this is why i
personally like writing i just literally
brain dump in there and be like well our
competitor a does x y and z and we
definitely don't want to be like that
so what could we do to be different we
could do this this and this right and if
you just brain dump all those ideas
about
you know what type of value it will
bring for your customers who you want
your customers to be
right sometimes they don't read about
other customer like future customers or
who you want those customers to be in
the future you know what's what's how is
the value different than the value you
provide today
is it is it going to be different or is
it just doubling down on what you do the
ways that you provide those value uh how
is it different than your competitors
why is it better
not just being better but like why is it
better what's the ways that you're going
to win and then also i think good
visions also say what you don't want to
do
i love i love reading a vision that's
like we're not going to be like that
and
that to me is so powerful because you're
like oh okay we're not going to copy
that right we're not going to go after
that because you can easily have a whole
team be like oh let's just copy what
they did over there
i'm learning a ton thank you for sharing
all this this is for me really helpful
too on that topic a little bit
say pm wants to get better at strategy
which we talked a little bit about do
you have any advice someone trying to
get better at being more strategic and
thinking about strategy
yeah um it was interesting i was just
talking to one of the chief product
officers who who graduated from my
program last year and now she's the cpo
of a company
and i said what was your advice for
especially people who are not chief
product officers yet
or ics because i hear from a lot of
people
you know
i'm not getting the opportunity to work
on strategy
and i loved her advice because she said
you know even when i didn't have that
role or responsibility or that scope i
sat there and i still imagined what i
would do if i was in their position and
i think that's powerful you know pretend
you're the cpo would you do something
different what would you do can you dig
into the data can you ask questions can
you get into there i'm not saying like
go reinvent the wheel for the company
but it's going to give you reps right
it's going to give you the experience
asking those questions
so i think that's powerful picturing
what
what you would do in their scenario
if you want to get better at strategy
talk to people who
really understand the market really
understand the financials i'd go
talk to your chief product officer if
you have one and just ask them like
what's your process how do you set this
right like we got to these three
priorities or something like how'd you
get there would you look at i think
that's important just having
conversations with people about what
their thought process is how they
analyzed it what that means i think
that's really important when you get
into setting strategy at higher levels
for product
a lot of it has to do with the market
and the customers and the financials and
things that we don't get exposed to as
much
as you know as a team level product
manager so the more you can talk to
people in other disciplines go have
conversation with sales and see why
people are buying competitors like what
was your win loss analysis why are we
losing
what do you think is the issue
a lot of times we just don't go and talk
to other departments and they have a
wealth of knowledge and we've got
subject matter experts sitting in
certain places that can fill you in on
how the market's moving and what things
are happening there and how people are
innovating and it is fascinating to talk
to those people so i would do that
i would talk to other departments i
would talk to your leadership try to
understand their thought process if you
are a leader and trying to figure out
how to do a lot of this um
one of the the biggest issues i see for
leaders and why i got
very excited about product operations
over the last couple years is the lack
of data
one issue i see is that leaders have
never really set strategy before so they
get into these positions and they don't
know where to start
and the place that you need to start is
data from everywhere you need to start
with internal data and you need to have
an analyst on your team i also tell them
hire hire a data analyst hire somebody
some expectancy consultants like people
they're great at crunching data i had
them on my team it's amazing but they'll
pull the numbers out they'll find
interesting patterns for you and you you
say i want to answer these questions and
they will go get the data for you put it
into ways that you can actually look at
it and then you can start making
informed decisions so you want to take
that data you want to take customer
research so whoever's talking to
customers you want to bubble that up and
make sure that you can see that as well
you want to take the company goals and
put that into context and then
really strategy always comes down to
asking the questions about like how can
we win how can we get further to the
goal which is the vision right
but it's also keeping in context of
where we are now and what we're able to
execute on now
and
i think it's interesting because it's
like
we don't always make the right choice
when it comes to strategy but you got to
make a choice and i think that's the
hardest part part for some people
they're like i want to be 100 certain
this is going to work and you can't and
i think a good aspect of being a leader
whether you're a product manager on a
team or even an executive is making the
best informed decision that you possibly
can at the time but then also being
willing to correct yourself if you find
out it's the wrong one by looking at all
the information and then saying okay
let's try something different uh and
that to me
is how we do great strategy right like
we take all the information we can we
make the best
possible guess to go in one direction
and then we just keep reevaluating it to
make sure it's the right direction and
if it's not we pivot
i love that your answer is talking to
people getting information gathering
data thinking and it's not go read books
on strategy go get an mba or anything
like that it's you you do you get better
by doing it and learning from other
people right yeah and seeing it's too
like for me
when i'm learning about strategy right
because it's not like i
just you know started product management
and started doing strategy immediately i
analyzed how other companies did it so i
was like how did netflix do their
strategy how did this company do their
strategy in reading how a company goes
from point a to point b it's fascinating
there's tons of articles on there about
how companies have done it but it just
helps you see that everybody does it
differently everybody's got a different
framework it doesn't matter what
framework you use as long as it works
for your company but they all got to
that framework by asking those questions
and looking at the data and deeply
understanding the market and deeply
understand their customers and just
trying to piece it all together awesome
you touched on product operations which
you know is your the book that you're
working on now i know that there's a
role in emerging role product operations
can you kind of give us a preview of
what this book's going to be about and
what people should be thinking about
there yeah so um
having worked with all these companies
especially the ones that are scaling
pretty rapidly i started realizing like
hey we trained all the teams
we deployed the strategy
we've got
a bunch of people now in this product
management role and then you look at
certain things and you realize it just
didn't scale to the rest of the team and
things broke down like one
standardization of processes everybody
had a different roadmap
cool i can't do anything with that when
i'm trying to set a strategy like if i
can't compare your roadmap to that
roadmap
all your time horizons are off all your
data's off nothing's like you know set
in the right format i can't roll that up
into my strategy as product leader
two maybe there's no career ladders for
the product managers three
we're having like 18 different types of
meetings and all the wrong people are in
the room
product managers can get the data that
they need to make the informed decisions
on the product strategy we're
interviewing customers one off and then
i find out like you know the same team
is hitting up all these customers over
here again they're getting really upset
these customers don't want to talk to
the same team over and over and over
again
product management at scale
is really hard and that's where product
operations comes in so what it does is
it helps you get the right insights to
the team
and then help standardize those outputs
and those check-ins to make sure that
you're on track for the right strategy
so
there's usually three parts to it that i
say and not all companies have all three
and it depends where you're at for where
you want to start with this but
typically we have internal data and
insights and that's a team that's going
in and taking all the data that we have
that lives in our financial systems our
you know our user analytics all of these
different things that live inside our
company and they're helping to surfaces
up in ways that people can look at them
see the progress of our strategy and
track those okrs and say okay we're
going to go this way or that way so that
helps give us the inputs we need for
strategy helps monitor the strategy and
it helps us make decisions
then there's also customer research
and user insights so that's really the
external data and market research
customer insights and market research so
that's like the external data that
doesn't live in our company that we need
to get from our customers
or our market to help inform strategy
so from a market research perspective
that might mean you know having
subscriptions to publications or making
sure that we have like subject matter
experts who are giving us great advice
where the market's moving but then also
for customer research it's like
standardizing the approach so that
product managers can go talk to
customers so we're not hitting up the
same person all the time we're recording
all the user interviews we do in a way
where we can actually search through it
and you know gain that information later
and go and revisit those things
it's really helping to streamline it
it's not centralizing user research as a
practice it's helping to scale user
research so that we can enable more
people to do user research especially
when you get into
some of these companies like when i
first started doing this
it was at athenahealth and we had 350
product managers and we had to make sure
they weren't bothering the people at the
same hospital over and over and over
again because they were when we came in
and we said wow okay cool
we've asked these people now the same
question 10 times from 10 different
teams like how do we make sure that
those things don't happen but how do we
also empower those product managers
to go still talk to them when they need
to so we're not taking user research
away we're just helping make it more
scalable more efficient give them more
tools for it and then the last one is
really standardizing your like processes
your cadences for strategy check-in so
it's like hey we do road map check-ins
every month these are the people that
need to be in the room we do you know
quarterly
uh planning sessions with executives and
this is the inputs to it this is the
outputs to it here's the decisions we
make in this meeting this is what we
review and those people can help
do that part and then help standardize
the product management processes that
touch other divisions so for instance
like
if i
need to update roadmaps to sales like
they will help
you know own that cadence of what that
looks like and how those formats go out
but what i say is it doesn't standardize
stuff that only belongs to a team like i
don't care how a team does their
stand-ups like you choose how to do that
i'm not going to standardize that but i
do care what format your roadmap comes
in i do care
how we make sure that we have a good
working relationship with sales i do
care that we have a good working
relationship with product marketing
those types of functions that's that's
kind of the interactions that we want to
standardize
i can't wait to read this book when do
you think it'll be coming out we're
aiming to get it out before the end of
the year
oh wow okay that's pretty soon i know
it's coming out
kind of on that topic
as a pm
trying to learn trying to get better
there's
so much information out there there's
books newsletters guilty of that uh
tweets uh advice podcast all these
things that are always coming at you as
a pm
and i hear a lot from vms they're just
like burnt out by all of the information
always coming at them and it's just like
never ending advice do you have any
advice for either new pms or just any pm
of just like how to take in
knowledge that's all out there and not
just kind of burn out i'm gonna burn
them out with more
so i'd say one
the the
best thing that you could possibly do
as a product manager even if you're
you've been in this role for a while is
to make sure that you're always learning
but the way that you're going to learn
the most usually is from execution so
what i'd say is first focus on that
focus on doing your job every time
then i would analyze your job and say
what's working what's not working and
then take out certain pieces of it that
you want to get better at and then do a
deep dive into that so like for me when
i was thinking about you know my career
and my stuff
i did a similar approach where i just
run into problems and i'm like i need to
learn more about like why that problem
is causing this
so if you know
one of them was like agile like i found
out that
a bunch of people who never did product
management before became product owners
they were writing like 8 000 user
stories for like very small little
features i'm like why are you writing so
many user stories so i went down like a
rabbit hole interviewing everybody who
wrote the agile manifesto and did scrum
and taught all those things to find out
like where this came from so then i
could figure out how to fix it and i
think you need to carve stuff out like
that where you go what's this topic i
want to get better at what's this going
to do to help me get to the next level
where do i need to learn and help fill
in my skill gaps so
for instance if you're not good at user
research or you haven't had a lot of
experience talking to customers i might
deep dive on that if you're not great at
data
analytics i would deep dive on that but
i think there's you know there's a
certain point where we get to
okay i understand the basic product
framework and everybody's going to have
different opinions
about what that framework should look
like but we all generally agree at the
end of the day like you should be
talking to your users you should be
working with your teams to develop what
that you know what a test should be run
some tests figure out what your users
want build it with your team in an
iterative fashion measure success and
keep going from there
that all generally stays the same but
how you do each part of that you're
going to find some people
have one opinion some people don't and
you have to
find something that works for you
and then stick with it and find out that
if it doesn't work for you change it and
this is where i get
really passionate and frustrated with
agile processes which i used to write
about a lot but
i feel like some some places we've
solved this problem some places we
haven't but
i try to tell teams that you know
started with scrum or started with some
of these more dogmatic processes if it
doesn't serve you
move on change it right everything's
meant to be iterated on everything's
meant to be adapted if it does not work
for you
you do not have to keep doing it and i
think that's
the biggest message i can tell to
anybody learning is really sit down do a
retrospective with yourself and say is
this helping me get better at being a
product manager and if it's not
change it right change your approach do
something different if it is keep it
keep it in your toolbox right create
your own toolbox and and go from there
what a perfect way to end our
conversation where can folks find you
online and how can listeners be helpful
to you
yeah i am on twitter all the time at
lizzie jean
l-i-s-s-i j-e-a-n so feel free to tweet
with me i
love hearing what you guys are up to you
can also submit questions if you have
questions to me at the product thinking
podcast so if you go to
producthinkingpodcast.com or
dearmelissa.com i take questions there
all the time i'm always curious what
everybody's thinking about what are your
questions what are your burning
questions that's how you can help me i
am just very passionate about figuring
out like what are the problems that
we're facing as product managers and
that's that's what makes me happy trying
to figure out where they're coming from
how do we solve it what's on people's
minds so definitely hit me up with
questions i always answer them on the
podcast and then my website melissa
perry.com has all my other information
if anybody needs to get in touch
amazing if anyone has any problems in
their pm job just tweet you and
they will get an answer is what you're
saying yes do that
amazing thank you so much melissa
thank you
that was awesome thank you for listening
if you enjoyed the chat don't forget to
subscribe to the podcast and even better
leave a review which helps a lot you can
also learn more at
lennyspodcast.com
i'll see you in the next episode